# edep-sim : An Energy Deposition Simulation

The energy deposition simulation is a wrapper around the GEANT4 particle
propagation simulation which handles all of the particle propagation and
geometry related issues.

GEANT4 is an excellent toolkit, but it requires you to provide the main
programs, as well as the input, and output tools.  This has proven to be a
very good design choice; unfortunately, it means that there is no standard
wrapper.  I've found myself using (and writing) almost identical
input/output wrappers several times, so edep-sim is intended to provide a
general starting point and allow users to concentrate on the physics.  The
main purpose edep-sim is to provide a summary of the energy deposited in
sensitive detectors (mostly through ionization and scintillation) and to
record the photons reaching photo-sensors.  As part of this, it can record
the detailed history of each particle and hit generated by the simulation.

EDep-Sim can be used as either a standalone program, or as a library. As a
standalone program, edep-sim provides a simple ROOT based file format which
will record the output of GEANT4.  When EDep-Sim is used as a library in
another application, the event information that would be saved to the ROOT
file is provided to a user class.

This documentation assumes that you are familiar with how to
write GEANT4 macro control files, and edep-sim can be configured using the
supported [macro commands](./doc/edepsim-command.list) and
[particles](./doc/edepsim-particles.list). The macro file provides control
for how the [primary particle kinematics](./doc/KINEMATICS.md) are
generated, and allows for fairly complex distributions in time and space,
as well as interfacing to external kinematics generators.  

The [GEANT4 output](./doc/OUTPUT.md) is made available by registering a
user class derived from EDepSim::PersistencyManager (which will fully
marshal the information). A default EDepSim::RootPersistencyManager is
provided to save the event information to a ROOT tree, and provides the
_usual_ method of accessing the results from the simulation. The classes in
the ROOT tree are accessible through python, and in C++ using the
edepsim_io library that is part of this distribution.

Where it is available (and in particular for argon), the simulation
implements a fairly detailed model of the energy deposited as
ionization and non-ionizing (e.g. scintillation) energy loss.  The
liquid argon model uses using the NEST model (M Szydagis et al 2013
JINST 8 C10003 and references therein).  All other models use the EM
saturation model provided by geant 4.

Input file translators are provided for several standard input file
formats.  In particular, this support input from both NEUT and GENIE.  The
GENIE input is read using the RooTracker format.

Be aware that the sequence of random numbers depends on the floating
point accuracy of the machine, so given runs are machine dependent and
may not be reproducible.

## Working with the source distribution

It's quite possible that you are working in an environment where `edep-sim`
has already been installed (check with your local expert).  However, if you
are installing it from source, you need to run the local setup and then
build it.  Assuming you've already cloned it from someplace and have the
source directories, then `source` the setup script in the top level
directory to define some simple aliases and define necessary environment
variables.  The only explicitly external requirements are that GEANT and
ROOT must be available (and found by cmake).  The setup script will make
sure that they can be located (using `thisroot.sh` and `geant4.sh`).

```bash
. setup.sh
```

The simulation is built using cmake.  CMake can be run by hand, but there
is a script in the build directory that can be run using the `edep-build`
alias.  The build has been tested with GEANT4 11.4 and ROOT 6.36, but it
will probably build with any recent version of GEANT4 and ROOT.

If you have doxygen installed in a place where `cmake` can find it, then
you can compile using

```bash
edep-build doc
```

which will create the html sub-directory containing Doxygen class
documentation.  The html is in the build directory.

### Required configuration for GEANT4 and ROOT

The edep-sim code will build with very standard installations of
GEANT4 and ROOT, but a few non-default options are needed:

 * Requires GEANT4 GDML Persistence: "-DGEANT4_USE_GDML=ON"

 * Recommended GEANT4 Datafiles: "-DGEANT4_INSTALL_DATA=ON"

 * If the display is being built, ROOT needs to be compiled with the
   geometry library and opengl.

These options are already turned on in most GEANT4 and ROOT installations.

If you are compiling ROOT and GEANT4 by hand, following is a general sketch
of how to install them (change for your versions):

```bash
tar xvzf root_v6.22.00.source.tar.gz
mkdir root-6.22.00-install root-6.22.00-build
cd root-6.22.00-build
cmake -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=../root-6.22.00-install ../root-6.22.00
make
make install
```

```bash
tar xzvf geant4.11.4.0.tar.gz
mkdir geant4-11.4.0-install geant4-11.4.0-build
cd geant4-11.4.0-build
cmake -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=../geant4-11.4.0-install \
      -DGEANT4_INSTALL_DATA=ON \
      -DGEANT4_USE_GDML=ON \
      ../geant4-11.4.0
make
make install
```

### Expert Compilation

This is actually just a generic cmake build system, so everything can be
done by hand.  It's a usual cmake build, but you need to make sure root and
geant are "in the path".  Assuming that you have the source in
"the-edep-sim-directory", will build in "the-build-directory", and want to
install in "the-install-directory", the commands are:

```bash
cd the-build-directory
cmake -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=the-install-directory the-edep-sim-directory
make
make doc
make install
```

You can make sure that ROOT and GEANT are correctly setup using

``` bash
source thisroot.sh
source geant4.sh
```

## Running the Detector Simulation

The detector simulation is run using the `edep-sim` program which
is a standard GEANT main program with minimal customization.  This
can be run in any directory.  You will need to provide some sort of event
kinematics generator (NEUT, NUANCE, NEUGEN, GPS, &c).  The preferred input
format is a rooTracker tree, but you can also use the text based tracker
input format (NUANCE may be the only program in the world still using this
format.  It was developed as a standard kinematics format for the IMB3
experiment in about 1990)

The program is generally run from the command line:
```bash
edep-sim [options] macro-file.mac [macro-file.mac] ...
```
with one or more macro files.  The output file will contain a root tree of
event information and a TGeoManager object summarizing the simulated
geometry.  There are example input files in the inputs sub-directory.

Some important options:

* -e <n>  : Add a `/run/beamOn <n>` command after the last macro is
		processed so that `n` events are generated.
* -g <gdml-file> : Load a gdml file.  This is equivalent to the
		`/edep/gdml/read` macro command.
* -o <output-file> : Write the output to the root file.  This is equivalent
		to the `/edep/db/open` macro command.
* -u      : Add a `/edep/update` command before the first macro is
		processed.
* -p <physics-list> : Set the physics list (see G4 documentation for the
		available lists.
* -C      : Toggle checking for overlaps in the geometry.

If `edep-sim` is run with the `-h` option, it will print a help message.
There are example macro files in the "inputs" subdirectory.

EDepSim uses some GEANT4 macro files to control how it is run.  These are
not usually visible to the user, but occasionally the executable can't find
them.  In that case, you can specify the location by setting the
EDEPSIM_ROOT environment variable to the root of the INSTALLATION area.
For example

```bash
export EDEPSIM_ROOT=$(dirname $(which edep-sim))/..
```

should find the right location for the necessary files.

An example of a command line is

```bash
edep-sim -o my-output.root -g geometry.gdml -u -e 100 muon-10000.mac
```

which will write 100 events to `my-output.root` using the geometry in
`my-geometry.gdml` according to the commands in muon-10000.mac.

The muon-10000.mac might contain:
```
####################################################################
#
# Generate a 10000 MeV muon beamed in the down stream direction.
#

# Define the particle and it's energy.
/gps/particle mu+
/gps/energy 10000 MeV

# Set the position of the particle gun.
/gps/position 0.0 0.0 -10.0 m

# This generates the direction of the muon.  This aims
# the particle downstream with the directions uniformly distributed in
# a 5 deg cone around the Z axis.
/gps/ang/type iso
/gps/ang/maxtheta 5 deg
/gps/ang/rot1 1 0 0
/gps/ang/rot2 0 -1 0
```
See the [kinematics commands](./doc/KINEMATICS.md) for how the kinematics should be specified in the macro file.

### Simple Debugging Display

There is a simple Eve based event display that can be optionally compiled
to read the ROOT output file.  It is not a complete event display, but can
be useful to help debug geometries, and input kinematics files.  It can
also be helpful to understand what events "look like".  It can be run using
the `edep-disp` command.  A help message is printed if it is run without
any arguments.

### Adding external user actions, kinematics generators and physics lists

External user actions and physics lists can be dynamically loaded at
runtime to allow overriding the default behavior.  The external user
actions will be called by the EDepSim user actions and are specified in the
macro file. The kinematics generator will be added to the primary vertex
gnerator. The external physics must be specified using environment
variables.

External actions, kinematics generators and physics lists are not required,
and should be considered "expert" usage.  When using external libraries,
you'll need to be careful not to break the assumptions that EDepSim needs
to make to work correctly.

#### External kinematics generators

There is an [example](./examples/ExternalKinematics/) kinematics generator
located in the examples directory.  An external generator is loaded using

```
/generator/kinematics/external/loadGenerator [library] [symbol] [option]
/generator/kinematics/set external
```

#### External user actions

The EDepSim user actions can be augmented by external user run actions,
event actions, tracking actions, stepping actions, and on the geometry
update.  These are specified in the macro file before the /edep/update
command using the

```
/edep/actions/loadUpdateGeometry [library] [symbol] [option]
/edep/actions/loadUserRunAction [library] [symbol] [option]
/edep/actions/loadUserEventAction [library] [symbol] [option]
/edep/actions/loadUserTrackAction [library] [symbol] [option]
/edep/actions/loadUserStepAction [library] [symbol] [option]
```

The external library will need to have a C function that returns
a point to the appropriate type.  The C function has the signature `action*
YourName(char*)`.  For example, a tracking action could be created using a
function

```C++
extern "C"
G4UserTrackingAction* CreateMyTrackingAction(char* option) {
   /// Return the pointer to the constructed class (not nullptr!).
   return nullptr
}
```

Other user actions return the related user action class, with the exception
of the geometry update generator which needs to return a pointer to the
`EDepSim::UserDetectorConstruction::UserUpdateGeometryAction`.  The
external constructor must be declared as

```C++
extern "C"
EDepSim::UserDetectorConstruction::UserUpdateGeometryAction* CreateMyUpdateGeometryAction(char* option) {
   /// Return the pointer to the constructed class (not nullptr!).
   return nullptr
}
```

## Specifying The Detector Geometry.

The detector geometry can be specified in more than one way.  The
first is to compile it into the executable by defining the appropriate
EDepSimBuilder classes.  There is an example of a simplified geometry
for the CAPTAIN LArTPC contained in the source.  The alternative is to
import a GDML definition using the ```/edep/gdml/read``` macro
command.  The gdml file can be specified from the command line using
the ```-g``` option

```bash
edep-sim -g geometry.gdml -o output.root macro-file.mac
```

### GDML Logical Volume Auxiliary Fields

Several auxiliary fields are parsed to help describe volumes in the
detector geometry and attach more meaning to the GDML description.
For example, here is a simple LAr detector description that is
attached as a sensitive detector, and has both an electric and a
magnetic field.

```
    <volume name="LArD_lv">
      <materialref ref="LAr"/>
      <solidref ref="LArD"/>
      <physvol>
        <volumeref ref="LArMod_lv"/>
        <positionref ref="LArD_el0_pos"/>
        <rotationref ref="identity"/>
      </physvol>
      <auxiliary auxtype="SegmentDetector" auxvalue="LArD"/>
      <auxiliary auxtype="EField"
		  auxvalue="(500.0 V/cm, 1.0 V/m, 500.0 V/cm)"/>
      <auxiliary auxtype="BField
		  " auxvalue="(2.0 tesla, 3.0 T, 1.0 G)"/>
      <auxiliary auxtype="StepLimit" auxValue="1.0 cm"/>
    </volume>
```

#### Auxiliary fields to set a sensitive volume

Sensitive logical volumes recording energy deposition are specified using
the "SegmentDetector", or "SurfaceDetector" types.  These take a value
which is the name of the sensitive detector that will record the
deposition.

```
<auxiliary auxtype="SegmentDetector" auxvalue="MySegmentDetectorName"/>
```

In the example above, the energy is recorded in a sensitive detector named
`MySegmentDetectorName`.  After an event is simulated, the deposited energy
is recorded in a map keyed by the sensitive detector name, and
with a value that is a vector of TG4HitSegment objects.  See the example in
the `./test` subdirectory for how to read this information from the output
tree.

```
<auxiliary auxtype="SurfaceDetector" auxvalue="MySurfaceDetectorName"/>
```

In the example above, the energy at surfaces (primarily optical photons) is
recorded in `MySurfaceDetectorName`.  After an event is simulated the hits
from opticalphotons are recorded in a map keyed by the sensitive detector
name and a value that is a vector of TG4PhotonHit objects.

#### Auxiliary field to define the electric and magnetic field.

Uniform electric and magnetic fields can be set using the `EField` and
`BField` auxiliary types.  The value for each is the field vector in
the volume specified by the X, Y and Z components (global
coordinates).  It is assumed that the field applies to all of the
daughter volumes.

```
<auxiliary auxtype="EField" auxvalue="(500.0 V/cm, 1.0 V/cm, 500.0 V/cm)"/>
<auxiliary auxtype="BField" auxvalue="(2.0 T, 3.0 T, 1.0 G)"/>
```

The possible units for the electric field are `volt/cm`, `volt/m`,
`V/cm`, and `V/m`.  You should specify a unit.  If no units are
provided, it is assumed that the units are `volt/cm`.

The possible units for the magnetic field are `tesla`, `gauss`, `T`,
and `G`.  If no units are provided, it is assumed that the units are
`tesla`.

Arbitrary electric and magnetic fields can be set using the
`ArbEField` and `BField` auxiliary types. The value for each is the
name of the grid file which specifies the value of the field at a set
of X, Y, and Z grid points (global coordinates).

```
<auxiliary auxtype="ArbEField" auxvalue="efield_grid_file.txt"/>
<auxiliary auxtype="ArbBField" auxvalue="bfield_grid_file.txt"/>
```

The grid file is specified in the following format:

```
# First row is a header defining the origin offset and grid spacing
# in each position coordinate X, Y, Z then hX, hY, hZ.
-2600.00 -4200.00 12300.00 200.00 200.00 200.00

# Next, each row contains one grid point: x,y,z,fx,fy,fz,f
0.00 0.00 000.00 0.40 0.00 0.00 0.40
0.00 0.00 200.00 0.40 0.40 0.00 0.57
0.00 0.00 400.00 0.40 0.40 0.40 0.69
...and so on...
```

The position, XYZ, is specified in `mm`, the electric field is
specified in `V/cm`, and the magnetic field is specified in `T`. The
grid spacing for each axis can be different.

FX, FY, FZ are the magnitudes of the fields in the X,Y,Z directions
and F is the total magnitude of the field vector. The Z coordinate
iterates first, then Y, and finally X when incrementing the lines.

To save space, the position of each point is not stored. Instead the
position is calculated using the offset and the index of the array: `x
= hx * i + offset_x`, where hx is the grid spacing in x, i is the ith
element of the array, and offset_x is the offset specified in the
first line for the x coordinate.

Comment lines starting with the `#` character are supported in the
grid file. They will be ignored when parsing the file.

#### Auxiliary field to set the drawing color for the volume

The display properties for the logical volume can be set using the `Color`
and `Opacity` auxiliary types.

The color of a volume can be set in two forms.  The first form allows
a few primary colors to be set by names.  These colors are defined by
the G4Colour class and are one of the list "white", "gray", "grey",
"black", "brown", "red", "green", "blue", "cyan", "magenta", and
"yellow".  A color can be set with one of these as the value.

```
<auxiliary auxtype="Color" auxvalue="red"/>
```

The color can also be set as an RGB triplet, or an RGBA quartet.

```
<auxiliary auxtype="Color" auxvalue="(1.0,0.0,0.0)"/>
<auxiliary auxtype="Color" auxvalue="(1.0,0.0,0.0,0.5)"/>
```

The fourth component of the color is the "alpha" which can run between
zero and one.  A value of zero is transparent, and a value of one is
opaque.  The alpha value can also be set using the opacity auxiliary
type.

```
<auxiliary auxtype="Opacity" auxvalue="0.5"/>
```

#### Auxiliary field to set the volume step limit.

The step limit can be set using

<auxiliary auxtype="StepLimit" auxValue="1.0 cm"/>

The value takes a number and a unit.

## Describing Detector Materials

Detector materials are described using the standard GEANT4 methods,
but with a few minor extentions to simplify usage.  For geometries
that are coded using the native GEANT4 routines (i.e. implementing a
specialized UserDetectorGeometry class and built by deriving builders
from EDepSimBuilder) should mostly depend the standard GEANT4
interface.

### Specifying Saturation for a Material (The Birks Constant)

Internally, GEANT4 manages the Birks constant for a material using
snippets that look like

```C++
G4Material* material = G4Material::FindMaterial("Scintillator");

// Set the Birks' constant for a material
double birks_constant = 0.12;
material->GetIonization()->SetBirksConstant(birks_constant);

// Get the Birks' constant for a material
birks_constant = material->GetIonization()->GetBirksConstant();
```

Unfortunately, this interface is not exposed when defining materials
using GDML.

#### Specifying the Birks' constant in a macro

As a work-around, there is an ```edep-sim``` macro that will
override the Birks' constant for an existing material.  The macro must
be used immediately before using the ```/edep/update``` macro.  The
Birks' constant is set using

```
/edep/material/birksConstant [material] [value] [unit]
```

where ```material``` is the name of an existing material, ```value```
is a floating point number (e.g. 0.126), and ```unit``` is a string
describing the units (e.g. ```mm/MeV```).  The unit must be a
```[Length]/[Energy]```, and must contain a '```/```', however there is
only minimal error checking to make sure the result is reasonable.
For standard polystyrene (which must have already been defined), the
Birks' constant would be set using

```
/edep/material/birksConstant Polystyrene 0.126 mm/MeV
/edep/update
```

An error is thrown if the material has not been defined, or if the
units are malformed (e.g. the unit is missing a '/')

#### Specifying the Birks' constant using a custom material property

While GDML does not provide an element that will directly set the
Birks' constant value for a material, it does define and interface
allowing material properties to be set.  For instance,

```
<define>
   <matrix name="BIRKSVALUE" coldim="1" values="0.126"/>
</define>
<materials>
  <material formula="Scintillator">
     <property name="BIRKSCONSTANT" ref="BIRKSVALUE"/>
  </material>
</materials>
```

will add a constant material property to the material properties table
for the "Scintillator" material.  By default, GEANT4 will ignore these
extra properties, but ```edep-sim``` has been modified to look for
specific properties and to use them to set values in the ```G4Material```
class.  Properties that will be interpreted are

* ```BIRKSCONSTANT``` -- Set the Birks' constant value.  The value
    must be in units of ```mm/MeV```.

## Running as a library

The simulation is developed as a library separated from a main program
wrapping the library.  The entire main program is only a few hundred
lines long, of which about twenty lines are needed to actually setup
and run the simulation.  It is relatively straight forward to take
this and include edep-sim into a separate package.  The example main
program (i.e. app/edepSim.cc) is commented and the library is started
beginning at about line 230.

### Using as a CMAKE package

The simulation is available for CMake projects using the find_package
macro.  It can be included using
```
find_package(EDepSim)
```
and then added to an executable using the
```
target_add_library(your-target PUBLIC EDepSim::edepsim)
```
which will add all of the required dependencies.

If you only want to use the i/o library, and don't need access to geant4,
you can use
```
target_add_library(your-target PUBLIC EDepSim::edepsim_io)
```
which only depends on ROOT.

## Dark History

EDep-Sim started as a simulation, named `csim`, of a proposed water
Cherenkov detector called the Underground Neutrino Observatory (UNO) in
around 2000 using Geant4.3 (as best as can be deciphered from very old CVS
repositories).  The core routines later evolved to be used by the T2K near
detector, were further changed to handle the CAPTAIN experiment, and were
finally separated from any particular experiment to become EDepSim.
